---
title: "Wetware o.1 - NYU Capstone"
date: "2020-05-17T22:40:32.169Z"
template: "post"
draft: false
slug: "capstone/"
category: "Liner Notes"
tags:
  - "Music"
  - "Writing"
  - "Spectacle"
description: "A description of my capstone project for NYUs Music Technology program."
---

## Abstract

The creative process and thinking that went into the making of “Wetware v 0.1,” - an ambient electronic composition that was initially conceived of as a multichannel audio installation and later reformatted as an EP (extended play) i.e a short collection of songs. 

<iframe style="border: 0; width: 350px; height: 470px; padding-left: 35%" src="https://bandcamp.com/EmbeddedPlayer/album=2014546485/size=large/bgcol=ffffff/linkcol=0687f5/tracklist=false/transparent=true/" seamless><a href="https://pisceanmalodymatrix.bandcamp.com/album/wetware-v-01">Wetware v 0.1 by pisceanmalodymatrix</a></iframe>

### Introduction

“Wetware v 0.1,” is an on-going technical and philosophical investigation into the use of technology in artistic and musical practice. It attempts to place contemporary (technologically-inspired) musical practice in conversation with traditional musical practice through nonverbal musical inquiry. Compositional artifacts such as song cycles, EPs or installations are periodically and sporadically released as a byproduct of investigations undertaken by cognitive participants. 
  
Such artifacts serve as a sonic record of the thoughts, feelings and information processed by participants during their involvement in these investigations. The creation of these artifacts benefits participants by invoking within them the beginnings of an artistic practice. A practice that by way of its definition as artistic seeks to question, mimic, abominate, bastardize and undermine the remaining facets of Spectacular society that hold technological efficacy, textual communication and materialistic worldviews as the dominant intellectual and artistic paradigms and returns artifacts or artistic experiences that simultaneously fit into and seek to undermine such paradigms by implicitly burying and obfuscating information in sonic architecture. The subsequent artifacts soothe both participant and audience member. Sonically pointing towards a place beyond the fictions of man. A natural home and context towards which the urban dweller is acculturated into an aversion of.

### Background 

This capstone begins in confusion. It begins with questioning the validity of assumptions, intellectual-creative capacities and beliefs such that whatever framework that is once held true - in the navigation of a life narrative, a personal identity and a worldview - falls away. 

What ensues is a terrifying scramble to replace such a framework in an effort to find meaning and context. Meaning and context are cognitive resources that are increasingly in short supply. A contemporary media environment extrapolates and serves both resources in increasingly bite sized portions of entertainment. Memes and continuously evolving internet slang demand the onlooker be acculturated into countless numbers of online in-groups just to understand presented media. A refusal to entertain the collective cheapening of context and meaning results in efforts made to read into the mechanisms that drive such a media culture. Texts like Guy Debord’s Society of the Spectacle attempt to explain such mechanisms by detailing observations and accounts that catalogue commodity fetisization and industrial-technological development as reasons for the increasing de-contextualisation i.e digitization of the modern lived experience. 

This text is highly recommended reading for possible participants in “Wetware,” both “v 0.1,” and onwards.  As a victim of this media environment, as an immigrant of multinational, mixed-racial and mixed-cultural origin and as an initial participant in “Wetware v 0.1” I have found it difficult to associate my personal and artistic identity with a specific profession, culture and genre of musical practice. Subsequently, I reflect on life's developments as though I were witnessing a grand spectacle over which I haven’t had much control. These reflections are not illustrative of any truth. But, as their unfortunate adopter, I find myself drawn to compositional aesthetics that seek to transcend cultural specificities and emphasise a sense of imagined space. 

Jon Hassel’s concept of “Fourth World,” music serves as a perfect example of such a space and is the main creative inspiration behind “Wetware v 0.1”. Additionally the work of artists, such as Holly Herndon, Kate NV and Visible Cloaks, that falls under the category of experimental, electronic and New Age informs the compositional practices of a “Wetware,” participant. The reason being that these works exploit technology’s decontextualizing powers for the purpose of reminding listeners of their interdependence with their communities and nature at large. 

### Project Description

In its current form “Wetware,” is presented as an ambient electronic EP mixed for binaural listening. The project incorporates digital and analogue sound synthesis techniques and houses a 20 minute listening experience that encourages cognitive release. We define cognitive release as cessation of or inhibition of the preoccupation of the mind with thoughts related to the external stressors of an urban life.  

The project was created with Ableton Live, Wotja Generative Midi Program, a Korg Minilogue and MaxMSP as the primary compositional tools. The seven tracks on the EP were initially composed either through recorded keyboard improvisation or multitrack MiDi sequences generated in the program Wotja. The recorded midi tracks are subsequently sonified with Ableton Live 9’s built in library of digital synthesizer plug-ins or the Korg Minilogue as a piece of “out-of-the-box,” gear. 

After arrangement the audio tracks are exported in mono as individual stems and imported into a MaxMSP patch for spatialisation. The MaxMSP patch exploits the ICST ambisonic library (which can be found in the Max Package manager) for the purpose of spatialization. The ICST library encodes the programmed movement of the audio stems in as high as 3rd-order ambisonic B-format and the patch outputs a resultant .wav file in either a selected 2 or 8 channels. 

The 2 channel version is intended for binaural listening through headphones and the 8 channel version is intended for a Morrow Cube array. The EP is composed of seven tracks titled Cradle, Mbira, Umuthi, Alice, Hearth, Splash and Take Off - each of which perform the similar task of introducing the listener to a textured sonic environment that differs from that of the previous or subsequent track.

### Composition and Production by Track

  #### Cradle

Higher frequency whistles dart quickly through the soundstage, creating the musical impression of a canopy dense with birds. This effect is achieved by recording a high frequency tone from a Korg Minilogue and processing the recording with a Max4Live device titled “Max DopplerPan,” that incorporates the doppler effect into a more typical ping-pong panning effect. This creates a sense of distance and kinetic motion. Several versions of this recording are layered and processed with the doppler-like panning effect set to occur at a variety of rhythmic frequencies. An additional drone-like melodic line is improvised beneath this sonic backdrop. The piece modulates between an F minor and F major key though a strict sense of contrapuntal harmony is not fostered in the creation or listening of the piece. 

  #### Mbira 
A series of Mbira melodies provide the rhythmic engine of this song (each is a sample ). The pitches of the Mbira aren’t so easily integrated into the 12 tone equal temperament scale. As a result the accompanying horns (synthesised) and electric bass parts heard in the song were improvised and made to match the key of the Mbira by ear. Because the piece takes its inspiration from Zimbabwean mbira music the same harmonic movement (which avoids description in tonal terms) repeats cyclically throughout the piece. The piece has similarities in style to percussion-driven minimalist compositions such as those by Steve Reich or Philip Glass.

  #### Umuthi
The arpeggios heard are generated using a Korg minilogue and the accompanying pentatonic flute melody line is improvised. Samples of birds, words from the zulu language and resampled parts of the song swirl around the soundstage. 

  #### Alice
A keyboard melody in C major is synthesised with a Karplus-Strong synthesis plug in and a MIDI delay effect is used to create the perception of several instruments playing the melody. These perceived instrument voices are panned in opposition to each other and a pad like synth patch from the Korg Minilogue fills out the rest of the soundstage.

  #### Hearth
This MIDI for each instrument heard in this piece was composed by the program Wotja. The specified voice types repeat a user set melodic sequence. This piece is in the key of Eb major, also uses Karplus-Strong synthesis to generate the melodic strings and a Korg Minilogue fills out the rest of the soundstage along with a sample of birds that has been deliberately stretched to gain digital artefacts that provide a sense of distortion tied to space as the sample is moved around the soundstage.

  #### Splash
This piece is in Eb major with occasional modulations to neighbouring keys. This modulation is probabilistically defined by parameters set within Wotja. Wotja operates like a multichannel midi device. MIDI from several channels is routed into Ableton Live and sonified using some of the Ableton presets. The emphasis on this truck was on pitched percussion instruments. This track differs textuarally from the previously described tracks.

  #### Take Off
This piece was composed almost exclusively on the Korg Minilogue. The main harmonic and melodic component is a keyboard improvisation in F major. This improvisation is resampled and the resampled sections of audio are stretched or sped up a few times using Ableton Lives built in elastic audio functionality to again create digital artifacts that add to the pieces synthetic feeling and compositional aesthetic. 

### Analysis and Conclusion

The resultant songs have a soothing effect and entertain the listener for some time but fail in the composer's opinion to deliver a sense of emotional impact. Their efficacy in a multi-speaker environment could not be assessed before the writing of this paper. That being said, no clear goals were set in the composition of these pieces aside from the development of pieces in a particular style - that style being synthetically inspired ambient electronic music. If that genre sounds like a vague cluster of descriptive terms - - it is. The composed pieces certainly sound experimental in nature but no metric by which to judge their effectiveness in soothing the listener has been set. 

Further analysis of these pieces won’t yield much academic insight without data on listener response. While the spatialisation is satisfyingly done for a first iteration of this project it lacks some clarity and more specific organisation. These pieces might have a greater emotional impact with the inclusion of recorded performances of live instruments or an accompanying visual composition.

### Future Work

I hope to accompany these works with abstract visual compositions and reformulate the project with more deliberate goals and intentions in mind, perhaps, by focusing on the reproduction of specific sonic spaces instead of imaginary ones. While it was a fun passion project it likely won’t have much widespread appeal though the generated pieces may work in the context of film scores or sound for accompanying installations. 

### References

* Ankeny, J. (n.d.). Jon Hassell: Biography & History. 
  * Retrieved from https://www.allmusic.com/artist/jon-hassell-mn0000177588/biography
* Beta, A. (2017, June 12). Fourth World in the 21st century. 
  * Retrieved from https://www.residentadvisor.net/features/2984
* Visible Cloaks Help Us Make Sense of 'Serenitatem'. (2019, July 05). 
  * Retrieved from http://www.self-titledmag.com/visible-cloaks-feature-frkwys-15-stream/
* Visible Cloaks: Synthesis and Systems. (n.d.). 
  * Retrieved from https://www.ableton.com/en/blog/visible-cloaks-synthesis-and-systems/
* Eno, B. What is Art Actually For?. 
  * Retrieved from https://youtu.be/XIVfwDJ-kDk
* Weinal, J. Inner Sound - Altered States of Consciousness in Electronic Music and Audio-Visual Media.  
  * Retrieved from Bobst Library, NYU. 
* Debord, G. (2010). Society of the Spectacle. Black & Red.
* Weinel, J. (2018). Inner sound: Altered states of consciousness in electronic music and audio-visual media. Oxford University Press.
* Agawu, V. K. (2016). The African imagination in music. Oxford University Press.
* Berliner, P. Africa, Shona Mbira Music. Nonesuch Records. 
* Tracy, H. Other Musics from Zimbabwe. International Library of African Music.
* Roginska, A., & Geluso, P. (2018). Immersive sound: The art and science of binaural and multi-channel audio. Routledge, an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group.
* Dewey, J. (1938). Logic: the theory of inquiry. Holt.






